" His ‘My Last Duchess," Andrea del Sarto," ‘Fra Lippo Lippi’, Tennyson’s ‘Ulysses’ and ‘Tittonus," T. His well known poem Ulysses is an excellent example of dramatic monologue in which he adopts a classical hero Ulysses or Odysseus as the main character for his work. Here he tries to focus on the adventurous as well as knowledge seeking spirit of Ulysses. But the philosophy of life given through the mouth of Ulysses is actually Tennyson’s own philosophy. In the poem Ulysses, Ulysses is supposed to be speaking and expressing his thoughts and feelings to the silent listeners.

It little profits that an idle king

Ulysses, the man of nimble wit, is not satisfied with his life among his subjects, who are unaware of his heroic mould.

I cannot rest from travel, I will drink

Life to the lees. He compares life to a cup of wine. Just a man drinks till he has reached the sediment at the bottom, Ulysses also will taste all aspects of life without leaving anything behind. Through these words, Ulysses’ insatiable passion for knowledge is expressed.

He is the man who can never take rest from the pursuit of knowledge. Ulysses has become old but it is the knowledge and experience which he has gathered so long urges him on even in the old age to sail in quest of knowledge. He knows that a life spent in idleness is no life at all. He is perfectly aware that knowledge is vast and unlimited and our life on earth is too short to learn everything.

Even a number of lives taken together would be too short for gaining all knowledge. So far he is concerned he has a single life to live. And of this single life too a greater part has already been spent. Only a few years of life are left to him.

Hence he is determined to make the best of every moment of the remaining years of his life. Ulysses knows that he and his sailors, being old are nearer death, but he has not given up hope and believes that old men also can earn great glory and achieve great deeds. So, he inspires his sailors to achieve some great deeds even in their old age before thy die. The paths of knowledge may be full of dangers, but he is strongly determined.

He knows that even old age cannot rob great men of their courage, bravery and other spiritual qualities. Therefore, he asks his sailors to show the same courage that they had in youth.
