 It is important to add that industrialism is not the same thing as capitalism, for although capitalism was the first and principal agent of industrialization, it is not the only one.  A revolution may be caused by a protracted drought, a harsh system of land tenure, a new ideology of peasant solidarity, a communications system that conveys messages to the rural poor, and an unexpected spar within the rulers -- all coming together at a moment in time.  This is one of the weaknesses of doctrinaire rational choice theory or dogmatic Marxism, the analytical assumption of a single dimension of motivation and reasoning. 
Industrial society makes urbanization desirable, in part so that workers can be closer to centers of production, and the service industry can provide labor to workers and those that benefit financially from them, in exchange for a piece of production profits with which they can buy goods.  What happens if an earthquake or other disaster, like in the case of Japan’s Fukushima plant, causes the technology to malfunction, not to mention the possibility of a systematic attack to our nation’s relatively vulnerable technological infrastructure?
3->	Larger societies with huge populations:
We recently hit a population milestone of 7 billion humans on Earth’s surface. 

•	In the simplest sense, an industrial society is a social system whose mode of production focuses primarily on finished good manufactured with the aid of machinery. ) The causes of an event are a mixed group of dissimilar influences with different dynamics and temporalities, and the effects of a given causal factor are also a mixed and dissimilar group.  As populations grow, and mechanization is further refined, often to the level of automation, many workers shift to expanding service industries.  It is calculated as the current population minus the initial population (at the beginning of the time period) divided by the initial population (then multiplied by 100). 

10->	Spread of heterogeneous culture:
Heterogeneity makes a difference because one of the central goals of positivist science is to discover strong regularities among classes of phenomena, and regularities appear to presuppose homogeneity of the things over which the regularities are thought to obtain.  Masses of people were moving to new environments and often found themselves faced with horrendous conditions of filth, overcrowding, and poverty.  So my small research team thought we’d ask a more straightforward question: was it the secular chicken that came first, or the economic egg?
Our recent paper in Scientific Advances shows that, in the 20th century, secularisation occurred before economic development and not the other way around.  Instead, it is visible that one person acts for a variety of motives at a given time, persons shift their motives over time, and members of groups differ in terms of their motivational structure as well. 
These urban centers require the input of external energy sources in order to overcome the diminishing returns] of agricultural consolidation, due partially to the lack of nearby arable land, associated transportation and storage costs, and are otherwise unsustainable.  (A transportation network, for example, may play a causal role in the occurrence of an epidemic, the spread of radical ideas, and a long, slow process of urban settlement.  The fertility number is generally lower than the fecundity number, which measures the potential number of children that could be born to women of childbearing age.  
7->	Increasing importance of science and education:

Receiving a good education helps empower you, thus making you strong enough to look after yourself in any given situation.  For decades, economists and political scientists, armed with modern computers and advanced statistics, have tried to find out whether it was Durkheim or Weber.  According to Oxfam, rising disparities of income and wealth are among the biggest global challenges in economic, social and political terms.  The production of food is shifted to large commercial farms where the products of industry, such as combine harvesters and fossil fuel-based fertilizers, are used to decrease required human labor while increasing production.  Likewise, there is great variation in the nature of ordinary, lived experience -- for middle-class French families celebrating quatorze Juillet, for Californians celebrating July 4, and for Brazilians enjoying Dia da Independência on September 7.  The countries best able to take advantage of these power sources expanded the most, and exert control over the politics of the globe from the late fifteenth century to around the year 1800. 
Oxfam, the international non-governmental organisation (NGO), estimates that 70 % of the world population live in countries where the gap between rich and poor has grown over the past 30 years.  Such a structure developed in the Western world in the period of time following the Industrial Revolution, and replaced the agrarian societies of the pre-modern, pre-industrial age.  The second Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-19th century until the early 20th century and took place in Britain, continental Europe, North America, and Japan.  The division of labor became an important part of society after the Agricultural Revolution when humans had a food surplus for the first time.  Before the Industrial Revolution, work was largely person- or animal-based, and relied on human workers or horses to power mills and drive pumps.  Typical characteristics, all of which are discussed elsewhere in this dictionary, include a division of labour; cultural rationalization; a factory system and mechanization; the universal application of scientific methods to problem-solving; time discipline and deferred gratification; bureaucracy and administration by rules; and a socially and geographically mobile labour-force.  Eventually, concerns over the exploitation of workers led to the formation of labor unions and laws that set mandatory conditions for employees.  There was paid work for men in the factories and mills, and so a clear gender division of labour emerged, with women staying at home to look after the children and the house.  It took approximately 12 years to grow from 6 billion to 7 billion people (United Nations Population Fund 2011). 

These dimensions of heterogeneity make the point: the social world is an ensemble, a dynamic mixture, and an ongoing interaction of forces, agents, structures, and mentalities. 
Characteristics of industrial society:
1->	Industrial society is associated with industrial revolution and industrialism:
Historians conventionally divide the Industrial Revolution into two approximately consecutive parts. 
industrialism,industrialization Both words denote the transition in methods of production which has been responsible for the vastly increased wealth-creating capacity of modern societies compared with traditional systems.  But before the days of modern surveys, the steam-powered scholars of the early 20th century had already noticed that industrialised societies tended to be less religious than agrarian ones; though they disagreed on the interpretation.  Think of the diversity within Islam documented so well by Clifford Geertz (Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia ); the diversity at multiple levels that exists among great cities like Beijing, New York, Geneva, and Rio (institutions, demography, ethnic groups, economic characteristics, administrative roles); the institutional variety that exists in the electoral democracies of India, France, and Argentina; or the wild diversity across the social movements of the right. 
 
In the eighteenth century, Europe experienced a dramatic rise in technological invention, ushering in an era known as the Industrial Revolution.  No longer needed for the production of food, excess labor is moved into these factories where mechanization is utilized to further increase efficiency.  Migration may take the form of immigration, which describes movement into an area to take up permanent residence, or emigration, which refers to movement out of an area to another place of permanent residence.  Migration might be voluntary (as when university students study abroad), involuntary (as when Somalians left the drought and famine-stricken portion of their nation to stay in refugee camps), or forced (as when many First Nations were removed from the lands they had lived in for generations). 
Global Gallup surveys give us a clear view of the relationship between secularisation and economic development – that the world’s poorest countries are also its most religious. 
The Industrial Revolution transformed economies that had been based on agriculture and handicrafts into economies based on large-scale industry, mechanized manufacturing, and the factory system.  Rather than planting and harvesting fields by hand, farmers were able to purchase mechanical seeders and threshing machines that caused agricultural productivity to soar.  Sociologists measure fertility using the crude birthrate (the number of live births per 1,000 people per year); just as fertility measures childbearing, the mortality rate is a measure of the number of people who die. 

5->	Losing importance of family and kinship:
   when people started moving from rural areas into towns and cities, in order to get jobs in factories and mills, this all changed.  The new generation became less preoccupied with maintaining family land and traditions and more focused on acquiring wealth and achieving upward mobility for themselves and their families.  How will that population be distributed? Where is population the highest? Where is it slowing down? Where will people live? To explore these questions, we turn to demography, or the study of populations. 
The growth rate of a population, or how much the population of defined area grows or shrinks in a specific time period, is therefore a function of the number of births and deaths as well as the number of people migrating to and from a country. 

9->	Widening gap between the rich and the poor:
Despite progress in many areas such as fighting hunger and poverty, social inequality keeps growing.  It is theorized that humans have divided labor since as far back as our time as hunters and gatherers when tasks were divided based mainly on age and gender. 

A fourth form of heterogeneity takes us within the agent herself, when we note the variety of motives, moral frameworks, emotions, and modes of agency on the basis of which people act.  
Industrial societies use external energy sources, such as fossil fuels, to increase the rate and scale of production.  On the other hand, a few decades later, the German sociologist Max Weber argued that religious change came first.  Advances in agricultural technology have allowed us to genetically alter and patent food products, which changes our environment in innumerable ways.  Increasingly the state took over many of the roles of the family listed by Murdock, leaving the family with the two irreducible functions previously referred to.  Instead of paying artisans to painstakingly spin wool and weave it into cloth, people turned to textile mills that produced fabric quickly at a better price and often with better quality.  So to observe that social phenomena are deeply heterogeneous at many levels of scale, is to cast fundamental doubt on the goal of discovering strong social regularities. 

Second is the heterogeneity that can be discovered within social categories of things -- cities, religions, electoral democracies, social movements.  It is not the case that all Kansans think alike -- and this is true for whatever descriptors we might choose in order to achieve greater homogeneity (evangelical Kansans, urban evangelical Kansans).  Families such as the Rockefellers and the Vanderbilts became the new power players and used their influence in business to control aspects of government as well.  Although the introduction of new technology at the end of the nineteenth century ended the industrial age, much of our social structure and social ideas—like family, childhood, and time standardization—have a basis in industrial society.  Advances in medical technology allow otherwise infertile women to bear children, which indirectly leads to an increase in population.  Products such as paper and glass became available to the average person, and the quality and accessibility of education and health care soared.  Further, there are added security risks: the loss of privacy, the risk of total system failure (like the Y2K panic at the turn of the millennium), and the added vulnerability created by technological dependence.  Social events are commonly the result of a variety of different kinds of causes that come together in highly contingent conjunctions. 
According to Parsons, this social change precipitated a clear change in the family from extended families with many functions, in the pre-industrials society, to privatised nuclear families with fewer functions in industrial society. 

In sociology, industrial society is a society driven by the use of technology to enable mass production, supporting a large population with a high capacity for division of labour.  It should be noted that, although industrialization is generally thought of as something affecting the manufacturing of goods, it is reasonable and indeed necessary to apply the term industrial to modern methods of raising productivity in agriculture and other industrial sectors, and in administrative contexts.  New machines, new power sources, and new ways of organizing work made existing industries more productive and efficient.  Some studies found that secularisation came first, some found that development comes first, and still others found they occur at the same time.  In The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman (2005) argues that technology is a driving force behind globalization, while the other forces of social change (social institutions, population, environment) play comparatively minor roles.  From the way we educate children in the classroom to the way we grow the food we eat, technology has impacted all aspects of modern life. 