
   Industrial Society and its Characteristics.


In sociology, industrial society is a society driven by the use of technology to enable mass production, supporting a large population with a high capacity for division of labour.
 Such a structure developed in the Western world in the period of time following the Industrial Revolution, and replaced the agrarian societies of the pre-modern, pre-industrial age.
 Industrial societies are generally mass societies, and may be succeeded by an information society.
 
Industrial societies use external energy sources, such as fossil fuels, to increase the rate and scale of production.
 The production of food is shifted to large commercial farms where the products of industry, such as combine harvesters and fossil fuel-based fertilizers, are used to decrease required human labor while increasing production.
 No longer needed for the production of food, excess labor is moved into these factories where mechanization is utilized to further increase efficiency.

Industrial society makes urbanization desirable, in part so that workers can be closer to centers of production, and the service industry can provide labor to workers and those that benefit financially from them, in exchange for a piece of production profits with which they can buy goods.
 This leads to the rise of very large cities and surrounding suburb areas with a high rate of economic activity.

 
In the eighteenth century, Europe experienced a dramatic rise in technological invention, ushering in an era known as the Industrial Revolution.
 What made this period remarkable was the number of new inventions that influenced people’s daily lives.
 Within a generation, tasks that had until this point required months of labor became achievable in a matter of days.
 Before the Industrial Revolution, work was largely person- or animal-based, and relied on human workers or horses to power mills and drive pumps.

One of the results of increased productivity and technology was the rise of urban centers.
 Workers flocked to factories for jobs, and the populations of cities became increasingly diverse.
 The new generation became less preoccupied with maintaining family land and traditions and more focused on acquiring wealth and achieving upward mobility for themselves and their families.
 People wanted their children and their children’s children to continue to rise to the top, and as capitalism increased, so did social mobility.

It was during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries of the Industrial Revolution that sociology was born.
 Social scientists emerged to study the relationship between the individual members of society and society as a whole.
 Families such as the Rockefellers and the Vanderbilts became the new power players and used their influence in business to control aspects of government as well.
 Although the introduction of new technology at the end of the nineteenth century ended the industrial age, much of our social structure and social ideas—like family, childhood, and time standardization—have a basis in industrial society.


•	In the simplest sense, an industrial society is a social system whose mode of production focuses primarily on finished good manufactured with the aid of machinery.

•	In industrial society the largest portion of the labour force is involved in mechanized production of goods and services.

•	Industrial society refers to that form of society, or any particular society in which industrialization and modernization have occurred.

Characteristics of industrial society:
1->	Industrial society is associated with industrial revolution and industrialism:
Historians conventionally divide the Industrial Revolution into two approximately consecutive parts.
 What is called the first Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-18th century to about 1830 and was mostly confined to Britain.
 The second Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-19th century until the early 20th century and took place in Britain, continental Europe, North America, and Japan.
 Later in the 20th century, the second Industrial Revolution spread to other parts of the world.
 New machines, new power sources, and new ways of organizing work made existing industries more productive and efficient.
 New industries also arose, including, in the late 19th century, the automobile industry.
 It should be noted that, although industrialization is generally thought of as something affecting the manufacturing of goods, it is reasonable and indeed necessary to apply the term industrial to modern methods of raising productivity in agriculture and other industrial sectors, and in administrative contexts.
 It is important to add that industrialism is not the same thing as capitalism, for although capitalism was the first and principal agent of industrialization, it is not the only one.
 Capitalism pre-dated industrialization and arguably varies more in fundamental form over time and from society to society.
 In The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman (2005) argues that technology is a driving force behind globalization, while the other forces of social change (social institutions, population, environment) play comparatively minor roles.
 The countries best able to take advantage of these power sources expanded the most, and exert control over the politics of the globe from the late fifteenth century to around the year 1800.
 Steam and rail power were the guiding forces of social change and globalization in this period.
 In this period of globalization, change is driven by technology, particularly the Internet (Friedman 2005).

But also consider that technology can create change in the other three forces social scientists link to social change.
 Advances in medical technology allow otherwise infertile women to bear children, which indirectly leads to an increase in population.
 From the way we educate children in the classroom to the way we grow the food we eat, technology has impacted all aspects of modern life.
 It took approximately 12 years to grow from 6 billion to 7 billion people (United Nations Population Fund 2011).
 How will that population be distributed? Where is population the highest? Where is it slowing down? Where will people live? To explore these questions, we turn to demography, or the study of populations.

The fertility rate of a society is a measure noting the number of children born.
 The fertility number is generally lower than the fecundity number, which measures the potential number of children that could be born to women of childbearing age.
 Sociologists measure fertility using the crude birthrate (the number of live births per 1,000 people per year); just as fertility measures childbearing, the mortality rate is a measure of the number of people who die.
 The crude death rate is a number derived from the number of deaths per 1,000 people per year.

Another key element in studying populations is the movement of people into and out of an area.
 Migration may take the form of immigration, which describes movement into an area to take up permanent residence, or emigration, which refers to movement out of an area to another place of permanent residence.

The growth rate of a population, or how much the population of defined area grows or shrinks in a specific time period, is therefore a function of the number of births and deaths as well as the number of people migrating to and from a country.
 So my small research team thought we’d ask a more straightforward question: was it the secular chicken that came first, or the economic egg?
Our recent paper in Scientific Advances shows that, in the 20th century, secularisation occurred before economic development and not the other way around.

Global Gallup surveys give us a clear view of the relationship between secularisation and economic development – that the world’s poorest countries are also its most religious.
 But before the days of modern surveys, the steam-powered scholars of the early 20th century had already noticed that industrialised societies tended to be less religious than agrarian ones; though they disagreed on the interpretation.

The early 20th century French sociologist Emile Durkheim believed that economic development came first.
 On the other hand, a few decades later, the German sociologist Max Weber argued that religious change came first.
 Some studies found that secularisation came first, some found that development comes first, and still others found they occur at the same time.


5->	Losing importance of family and kinship:
   when people started moving from rural areas into towns and cities, in order to get jobs in factories and mills, this all changed.
 There was paid work for men in the factories and mills, and so a clear gender division of labour emerged, with women staying at home to look after the children and the house.
 Increasingly the state took over many of the roles of the family listed by Murdock, leaving the family with the two irreducible functions previously referred to.

According to Parsons, this social change precipitated a clear change in the family from extended families with many functions, in the pre-industrials society, to privatised nuclear families with fewer functions in industrial society.


6->	Large scale division of labour:
Division of labor refers to the range of tasks within a social system.
 The division of labor became an important part of society after the Agricultural Revolution when humans had a food surplus for the first time.
 During the Industrial Revolution, labor that was once specialized was broken down for the assembly line.
 It keeps you aware of your given surrounding as well as the rules and regulations of the society you're living in.
State which assumes the central power in the industrial society is more known for its welfare activities than for the regulative functions.
Warfare can be ruinous for an advanced industrial society for it involves deadly war weapons and economic dislocations.


9->	Widening gap between the rich and the poor:
Despite progress in many areas such as fighting hunger and poverty, social inequality keeps growing.
 It undermines social cohesion and trust in democracy, hampering economic growth and preventing social advancement.
 The whole of society is affected.

Oxfam, the international non-governmental organisation (NGO), estimates that 70 % of the world population live in countries where the gap between rich and poor has grown over the past 30 years.
 Developing countries, emerging markets and industrial countries are equally affected.
 According to Oxfam, rising disparities of income and wealth are among the biggest global challenges in economic, social and political terms.

Economic inequality affects many areas of life, including life expectancy, education opportunities and health.
 So to observe that social phenomena are deeply heterogeneous at many levels of scale, is to cast fundamental doubt on the goal of discovering strong social regularities.


Let's consider some of the forms of heterogeneity that the social world illustrates.


First is the heterogeneity of social causes and influences.
 A revolution may be caused by a protracted drought, a harsh system of land tenure, a new ideology of peasant solidarity, a communications system that conveys messages to the rural poor, and an unexpected spar within the rulers -- all coming together at a moment in time.


Second is the heterogeneity that can be discovered within social categories of things -- cities, religions, electoral democracies, social movements.
 Think of the diversity within Islam documented so well by Clifford Geertz (Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia ); the diversity at multiple levels that exists among great cities like Beijing, New York, Geneva, and Rio (institutions, demography, ethnic groups, economic characteristics, administrative roles); the institutional variety that exists in the electoral democracies of India, France, and Argentina; or the wild diversity across the social movements of the right.


Third is the heterogeneity that can be discovered across and within social groups.


A fourth form of heterogeneity takes us within the agent herself, when we note the variety of motives, moral frameworks, emotions, and modes of agency on the basis of which people act.
 Instead, it is visible that one person acts for a variety of motives at a given time, persons shift their motives over time, and members of groups differ in terms of their motivational structure as well.
 So there is heterogeneity of motives and agency within the agent.
