Battling pandemic fatigue: Some feel burned out as the Covid-19 outbreak drags on with no end in sight

Freelance writer Sng Ler Jun has been taking on more writing assignments since March to earn extra money for his family and himself.
"I'm doing unpaid writing work to beef up my resume so it'll help in my job hunt," said Sng, who is an only child.
"It's demoralising thinking about it and I feel burned out.
"

Because of this, his mood and energy has been low and he no longer enjoys the walks he used to take in the neighbourhood.
Dr Annabelle Chow, principal clinical psychologist at Annabelle Psychology, said the burnout a person experiences due to effects brought about by Covid-19 is a sign of pandemic fatigue.
Although it is not classified as a mental disorder, the effects of pandemic fatigue are nevertheless real and have an impact on those experiencing it," she said.
Signs include reduced socialising with others; feeling restless, sad, helpless, unmotivated and frustrated; being irritable and sensitive; and having low mood and energy, and insomnia.
Long-term worries about a pandemic can take a toll on mental and emotional health and may result in the worsening of mental health conditions and chronic health problems.
Terri Chen, senior clinical psychologist at the National University Hospital's (NUH) Department of Psychological Medicine, said it is likely that people started feeling these effects in April when the circuit breaker here was extended.
"Everyone was required to adapt in a short amount of time and many people were accepting of these restrictions as they thought it was a short-term measure to deal with the virus," said Chen, who is head of psychology at NUH.
"But when the circuit breaker was extended and subsequent announcements about phase one and phase two were made, it was hard for people to keep up, and even more so with no clear end in sight.
"

Dr Chow said seniors, children, caregivers, front-line workers, those who are living alone or socially isolated, and those who already struggle with depression and anxiety have an increased risk of getting pandemic fatigue.
Dr Geraldine Tan, director and principal psychologist at The Therapy Room, started noticing signs of pandemic fatigue in her clients last month.
The breaks they used to take overseas are now non-existent and the work they do has taken a radical shift for some, especially if they are working from home," she said.
People in Singapore are very used to travelling and now we appear to be imprisoned on our island.
"

For those working or studying from home, the frequent need to be connected via video conferencing also contributes to the fatigue.
I've put on 5kg since the circuit breaker and I don't want people to see me looking like a mess at home.
One danger of pandemic fatigue is that people may drop their guard against the virus.
It showed that 44 per cent of people are tired of following the necessary health measures.
These include having to wear a mask, checking in with SafeEntry, limiting the size of physical gatherings with friends and family, and not being able to travel overseas.
Habituation - the progressive decrease in response, such as feelings of anxiety, after repeated exposure to a stimulus - has caused people to become less careful or conscious about the precautions they need to take than they were at the start of the pandemic, said Chen.
"This means that over time - especially if we or anyone we knew did not get Covid-19 - we are likely to be less careful or conscious about the precautions as it would appear that there is less of a need to maintain such levels of vigilance," she said.
While it is normal to drop our guard when we see no end in sight, a reminder of the benefits of maintaining precautions and the consequences of not doing so would help people stay vigilant to fight Covid-19, Chen added.
Dr Chow cautioned that social avoidance and distancing can make people feel isolated and lonely, and may increase stress and anxiety.
Chen advised people to seek help from a psychologist if they experience persistent anxiety, hopelessness or sadness for more than two weeks, which in turn affects their performance and relationships.
While it is normal to feel weary in response to the pandemic, it is important to remember that "we are not alone in our struggles", she said.
"

HOW TO COPE WITH PANDEMIC FATIGUE
Terri Chen, head of psychology and senior clinical psychologist at the National University Hospital's department of psychological medicine, gives some tips.
Practise awareness to take care of your mental health.
Take some time to check in with yourself daily.
This can be as short as one minute a day to observe and describe to yourself what you are thinking and feeling within.
This can lead to criticisms being directed towards ourselves or others, which may worsen our mood.
Show kindness to yourself or others through one act a day.
Research has shown that this can help us feel happier and it also boosts our immune system and energy levels.
BE PATIENT: We do not know when the coronavirus pandemic will end and it is hard to be patient with the safety restrictions indefinitely.
Make space for emotions, as it is impossible to think logically 100 per cent of the time.
BE EFFECTIVE: There are many tips and suggestions on how to cope with the pandemic, such as practising mindfulness or working out, and it can be overwhelming - and tiring - to try many things at once.
It is more effective to identify what need - physical, emotional, intellectual or spiritual - is most pressing and try one technique at a time to gauge if it helps you.
