 Short for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics, the field is receiving attention that is justified in the sense that more and more careers are merging these disciplines and calling for critical and analytical skills.

For people aiming for a STEM field, cultivating a passion and understanding of STEM from an early age can be a good start.
 Here is a guide to resources, both online and offline, that children of different age groups could use to build a strong foundation in STEM.

CLASSES IN DHAKA
SciTech Academy runs classes on the fundamentals of STEM and then specialised classes on robotics, programming and environmental sciences.
 Their classes touch on coding, animation, physics, chemistry, digital and media.
 Each course runs for three months and their monthly fee is about BDT 5500 with an admission fee of BDT 1000.
 They aim to teach kids 21st century skills including problem solving, critical thinking, curiosity and creativity.

Aloha Bangladesh teaches mental math to kids in a way that builds their computational ability for the long run.
 Kids learn to calculate faster and more confidently, without using a calculator.
 Aloha has almost 30 branches across Dhaka city and 15 more in different districts across the country.
 Their classes are split into Aloha Senior and Aloha Junior based on age range.
 Aloha's admission fee for their Dhaka centres ranges from BDT 4000 to BDT 5900 while their monthly fee ranges from BDT 1500 to BDT 2500.

STEM 4 Future uses a multidisciplinary format to teach kids STEM subjects and exposes them to the practical applications of the field.
 Kids learn coding, game development and design.

YOUTUBE CHANNELS
While kids being on electronic devices for significant amounts of time is generally discouraged, the limited time they are allowed can be used to gear them towards science-related YouTube channels which do a great job of explaining scientific concepts in a fun, learning manner.

Crash Course Kids uses animation to teach everything from space science to physical science and life science.
 SciShow Kids has a more practical approach and has a variety of content including fun segments such as 'Science in the Kitchen', and segments where they explain how everyday machines around us work.
 There are also channels that are dedicated simply to inspire and engage girls in science, such as Science With Sophie.

Similarly, CrashCourse focuses on science but for an older age range.
 While we are on the subject of super fun animated videos, Kurzgesagt – In a Nutshell specialises in futurism, philosophy and of course, science!
Ever watched Draw My Life videos? We love it.
 And you can get more of these while learning fun laws of science under 5 to 10 minutes.
 But if you're more of a biology person, Bozeman Science could soon become your most watched channel once you start.
 Why does ice melt? What is a blood clot? Newton's cradle? Try out www.
com or www.
org
Advanced learners can check out one of the following: www.
com, www.
com, www.
com, or www.
com
AT-HOME ACTIVITIES
There are plenty of fun and feasible science experiments and activities that kids can do safely at home and with available household objects (with some adult supervision of course).

Playing around and having fun with science may create a liking for the subject once they realise how fun it can be.

Playlists of numerous ideas for such activities and experiments can be found at the following YouTube channels: Nat Geo Kids, PBS KIDS for Parents, and SciShow Kids.
 The show 'Backyard Science,' is available on YouTube in the channel Kids Science and each episode is packed with many fun experiments that can be done at home.

GAMES AND TOYS
As a supplement to institutional science learning, board games and kits are a fun way to get kids interested in science while keeping them occupied.

Onnorokom Bigganbaksho has a range of kits that cover various aspects of math and science.
 Each kit comes with a range of tools and components that kids can use to experiment, build things or simply play around with.
 The price for each box ranges from BDT  650 to 970 with only a few exclusive kits being priced at BDT 1450 to 2990.
com and in physical stores such as Shwapno.

The Onnorokom Bigganbaksho YouTube channel has complementary videos that demonstrate many of the experiments.
 They also have many science-related videos where they explain concepts and answer questions, in Bangla.
 These games help kids develop counting skills, spatial skills and pattern identifying ability or helps them learn about structures, gravity and forces.
 Explained is another docu-series featuring science and much more.
