Industrial Revolution.
Industrial Revolution, in modern history, the process of change from an agrarian and handicraft economy to one dominated by industry and machine manufacturing.
This process began in Britain in the 18th century and from there spread to other parts of the world.
Although used earlier by French writers, the term Industrial Revolution was first popularized by the English economic historian Arnold Toynbee(1852–83) to describe Britain’s economic development from 1760 to 1840.
The Industrial Revolution marked a period of development in the latter half of the 18th century that transformed largely rural, agrarian societies in Europe and America into industrialized, urban ones.
Fueled by the game-changing use of steam power, the Industrial Revolution began in Britain and spread to the rest of the world, including the United States, by the 1830s and ‘40s.
Modern historians often refer to this period as the First Industrial Revolution, to set it apart from a second period of industrialization that took place from the late 19th to early 20th centuries and saw rapid advances in the steel, electric and automobile industries.
More efficient, mechanized production meant Britain’s new textile factories could meet the growing demand for cloth both at home and abroad, where the nation’s many overseas colonies provided a captive market for its goods.
In addition to textiles, the British iron industry also adopted new innovations.
CAUSES OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

The Industrial Revolution first began in Britain in the 18th century but soon spread throughout Europe and North America.
Historians have identified several causes for the Industrial Revolution, including: the emergence of capitalism, European imperialism, efforts to mine coal, and the effects of the Agricultural Revolution.
Capitalism was a central component necessary for the rise of industrialization.
Historians refer to the form of capitalism common during the Industrial Revolution as laissez-faire capitalism.
Often, laissez-faire capitalism is also referred to as free market capitalism or market capitalism.
At the time, it was a revolutionary idea, because in the previous centuries, mercantilism had been the dominant economic system.
In general, mercantilism is viewed as an economic system that favored heavy government control and regulation.
However, prominent thinkers, including Adam Smith, began to argue against mercantilism in favor of an economic system with more freedom for individuals.
Smith argued against mercantilism and government control of the economy and instead proposed the idea of the ‘invisible hand’.
Capitalism caused the Industrial Revolution because industrialization required significant work and investment from individuals and not necessarily the government.
The next major factor that helped the development of the Industrial Revolution was the impact of European Imperialism.
While not directly a cause of the start of the Industrial Revolution, imperialism as a concept was linked with the growth of industrialization.
During this period of time, which historians refer to as the Age of Imperialism, large sections of the world came under European control, including: North America, South America, Africa, Indian, Australia, and China.
In general, the Age of Imperialism occurred prior to and during the rise of industrialization.
The next main reason for the start of the Industrial Revolution was the mining of resources such as coal, which were vital to the processes of industrialization.
For instance, Britain was the first to industrialize and had large supplies of coal present in the country.
Coal was a necessary ingredient in the industrial process as it fueled the steam engines that were used in trains, ships and all other sorts of machinery.
Finally, the last cause of the Industrial Revolution was the effects of the Agricultural Revolution.
Impact of Steam Power 
An icon of the Industrial Revolution broke onto the scene in the early 1700s, when Thomas Newcomen designed the prototype for the first modern steam engine.
Watt later collaborated with Matthew Boulton to invent a steam engine with a rotary motion, a key innovation that would allow steam power to spread across British industries, including flour, paper, and cotton mills, iron works, distilleries, waterworks and canals.
The demand for coal skyrocketed throughout the Industrial Revolution and beyond, as it would be needed to run not only the factories used to produce manufactured goods, but also the railroads and steamships used for transporting them.
Transportation During the Industrial Revolution

Britain’s road network, which had been relatively primitive prior to industrialization, soon saw substantial improvements, and more than 2,000 miles of canals were in use across Britain by 1815.
Communication and Banking in the Industrial Revolution
The latter part of the Industrial Revolution also saw key advances in communication methods, as people increasingly saw the need to communicate efficiently over long distances.
Cooke and Wheatstone’s system would be used for railroad signaling, as the speed of the new trains had created a need for more sophisticated means of communication.
In it, Smith promoted an economic system based on free enterprise, the private ownership of means of production, and lack of government interference.
Working Conditions
Though many people in Britain had begun moving to the cities from rural areas before the Industrial Revolution, this process accelerated dramatically with industrialization, as the rise of large factories turned smaller towns into major cities over the span of decades.
In the decades to come, outrage over substandard working and living conditions would fuel the formation of labor unions, as well as the passage of new child labor laws and public health regulations in both Britain and the United States, all aimed at improving life for working class and poor citizens who had been negatively impacted by industrialization.
He later built several other cotton mills in New England, and became known as the “Father of the American Industrial Revolution.
By the end of the 19th century, with the so-called Second Industrial Revolution underway, the United States would also transition from a largely agrarian society to an increasingly urbanized one, with all the attendant problems.
Historians continue to debate many aspects of industrialization, including its exact timeline, why it began in Britain as opposed to other parts of the world and the idea that it was actually more of a gradual evolution than a revolution.
Regardless of these questions, the Industrial Revolution had a transformative economic, social and cultural impact, and played an integral role in laying the foundations for modern society.
