Many of us have friends in our lives over the years.
 Some friends we make as children and then lose contact as we grow older.
 But then there is that last group of friends – those we call true friends – they are those we have a mutual caring about, and we understand each other’s hearts, and where bonds are formed between us that span any distance in proximity and where the bonds run so deep that no amount of time apart or lack of words will change the way we feel about that friend.
 These are our true friends, and when one comes into your life cherish it! As a child our family moved often and so I was constantly making new friends each place we moved.
 And as a single mother for many years of my life it was even more difficult to make time for friends because playing the role of two parents by yourself while also being the sole support of your family was overwhelming to say the least.
 But even during those challenging years there were individuals during that time who came into my life that I consider my truest of friends.
 They are individuals who saw me through tough times and who always saw the best in me despite any of my shortcomings.
 They gave me hugs, even at times that I may not have deserved one.
  These true friends were individuals who were there for me…maybe not always in person or in word every time, but always in heart…and knowing that helped me through incredible challenges throughout the years.
 True friends just do that – they help us grow and change for the better.
  They support us in good times and bad.
 And no matter how far apart time and distance may cause us to grow from one another, and even if death takes one of them from this world to the next, we always have the comfort of knowing that these true friends are still there for us, even if only in spirit, cheering us on and wishing us the best, because that is what true friends do for each other.

Friendships take many shapes and when young you believe friendship is one solely between peers.


Like relationships, friendships take work – hard work at times! Like relationships there can be break-ups, big ones that reverberate across a large group of people, as the ground shifts, old friendships crumble, new ones are formed.
 Unlike most relationships, friendships can be sustained for months, even years, with only remote contact – it is amazing how one can sense the others problems, call just at the right time, how easy it is to slot back into relaxed chat after a three-year hiatus apart and pick up the conversation as if from the day before.
