‘The Good Morrow’ is a typical Donnian love poem, divided into three stanzas.
 It’s one of those love poems in which he praises the spiritual relationship between men and women and hails it so ardently.


In the opening stanza, the poet expresses his wonder as to what he and his beloved did before they fell in love with each other.
 He compares the love experiences of himself and his beloved with `weaning’, falsely sucking country pleasures’ and `snorting.
 But now the poet using the conjunction ‘But’ makes a contrast and say’s that all these past physical activities seem to be utterly meaningless.
 The closing two lines of the first stanza imply that though the poet indulged himself in ‘country pleasures’, he has never been unmindful to perfect beauty of ideal spiritual love, which he always desired and has finally ‘got’ in his present beloved.


Obviously there is a shift from physical to spiritual love, sleeping to waking period, sensuous appearances to ideal reality and as if from platonic cave to the world of light in the poet and his beloved.
 Here the poet seems to have touched the metaphysics of Plato.
 Similarly Donne also begins with physical love and soon he turns to Platonic or metaphysical love.


The first stanza contains several Donnian elements.
 Another noticeable thing is that Donne swears his true relation – ‘I wonder by my troth’.
 Here Donne compares himself and his beloved with the seven sleepers.
 Surely the word ‘did’ includes the connotations of sexual doing – what did we ever do with the time?

The second stanza begins with hail and celebration.
 But the speaker and his beloved have overcome this fear and a peaceful satisfaction prevails their love.
 They love so faithfully and ardently that their love has the force to be merged into the universal love and to move out to become “an every where”.


As spiritual lovers, the poet and his beloved are indifferent to earthly pleasures and possessions – let the sea-lovers and map-lovers do what they like to do.
 The lovers want to be happy with their joint world though they have their individual worlds but their individual worlds are fused into a single world.
 Now they are the joint owners of a single world.


Here in this stanza, we find the presence of imagery from the contemporary geographical world.


The third stanza opens with endearing words from the speaker.
 The simplicity of their heart is also reflected in their faces, which are conceived as two hemispheres of their world.
 But their world of love is so unearthly that its hemispheres are free from coldness and decay.
 They have love equally and proportionately.
 They have renounced the mundane world in order possess an unearthly world.


In the first stanza, there is the regret for past doings, in the second stanza the pleasure of discovering something in the last stanza, the prospect/hope of doing better/using the discovery.
 The abrupt beginning of the poem, the use of conceits form everyday life and myth in the first stanza, the geographical reference of stanza two, the use of scholastic philosophy in stanza three, and ultimately the emphasis of spiritual love continue to make it one of those poems of Donne which combine intellect and emotion.
