Back then, webcomics like Cyanide and Happiness and Loading Artist were quite popular on Facebook and Instagram, and as far as I was concerned, Cartoon People was trying to emulate a similar appeal.
Over the years, I got the opportunity to learn more about their plans and vision, and also had the chance to work alongside a few of the group's members.
Cartoon People are celebrating their fourth anniversary this year, and I thought of taking this opportunity to look at how far they've come, and how some of their own artists are set to make it big on a global basis.
For those of you who are unfamiliar with the group, Cartoon People is a community of Bangladeshi cartoonists and visual storytellers that was founded in 2016 by cartoonist Syed Rashad Imam Tanmoy.
Apart from holding regular workshops and sketchbook sessions for its members, as well as for the general public, the group has also gone on to organise events related to their line of work.
In the process of doing so, they have worked with different local and international organisations such as a2i, United Nations, World Bank, and so on.
They've gone from being a small community of cartoon and comic enthusiasts, to taking on bigger roles to develop the art form, as well as take on other social projects.
Some of my personal favourites from Cartoon People include The Bathroom Artist by Walker Bin Zaman, Gorib Anju by Tamim Anju, Tiborai er Cartoon by Chandrika Nurani Irabotee, Peu Draws by Debadrita Peu, Tube Light by Tuba Anjum, and Shesh Raater Shopno by Ayman Aswaf.
The thing about these artists is the variation in their work, and their ability to say so much through their stories and characters.
From entertaining us with humorous and satirical comic strips, to making us think and question global and societal issues through illustrations and cartoons, they have left no stone unturned to establish themselves as important figures in our local art scene.
The group is eager to publish their own line of comics, as well as create some visually stunning animation along the way.
