It’s one of those love poems in which he praises the spiritual relationship between men and women and hails it so ardently.
In the opening stanza, the poet expresses his wonder as to what he and his beloved did before they fell in love with each other.
He compares the love experiences of himself and his beloved with `weaning’, falsely sucking country pleasures’ and `snorting.
’ The reference to these three physical activities indicates that they spent a life of worldly enjoyment.
But now the poet using the conjunction ‘But’ makes a contrast and say’s that all these past physical activities seem to be utterly meaningless.
The closing two lines of the first stanza imply that though the poet indulged himself in ‘country pleasures’, he has never been unmindful to perfect beauty of ideal spiritual love, which he always desired and has finally ‘got’ in his present beloved.
Obviously there is a shift from physical to spiritual love, sleeping to waking period, sensuous appearances to ideal reality and as if from platonic cave to the world of light in the poet and his beloved.
In his metaphysics, Plato at first takes something concrete such as man, but soon he leaps into abstract namely the Form of man.
Similarly Donne also begins with physical love and soon he turns to Platonic or metaphysical love.
This abrupt colloquial beginning, which is so characteristic of Donne startles us and captures our attention.
Another noticeable thing is that Donne swears his true relation – ‘I wonder by my troth’.
Any of his contemporary of Elizabethan poets might swear to God, but Donne has not done it.
Then there are the references of physical union and the use of imageries in the following three lines.
The fourth line contains a legendary conceit,a legend that tells of seven young men of Ephesus who took refuge in a cave during the persecution of Diocletian and were entombed there.
Surely the word ‘did’ includes the connotations of sexual doing – what did we ever do with the time?

The second stanza begins with hail and celebration.
That the married women or men involve in extra-marital affair was a dominant theme in the Elizabethan and Jacobean literature.
So, fear only works in sensual lovers as motivation for watching over each other, least the other should become unfaithful to his or her mate.
But the speaker and his beloved have overcome this fear and a peaceful satisfaction prevails their love.
They love so faithfully and ardently that their love has the force to be merged into the universal love and to move out to become “an every where”.
As spiritual lovers, the poet and his beloved are indifferent to earthly pleasures and possessions – let the sea-lovers and map-lovers do what they like to do.
The lovers want to be happy with their joint world though they have their individual worlds but their individual worlds are fused into a single world.
The two lovers stand so closely that their respective faces are reflected in each others eyes.
The simplicity of their heart is also reflected in their faces, which are conceived as two hemispheres of their world.
But their world of love is so unearthly that its hemispheres are free from coldness and decay.
They are not afraid of separation or break up of their “relation, because” ‘what ever dyes, was not mixt equality’.
The ingredients of their love have been proportionately mixed and there is no ware and woof between them.
Experience has thought them that the true happiness can be achieved through a mutual spiritual friendship.
In the first stanza, there is the regret for past doings, in the second stanza the pleasure of discovering something in the last stanza, the prospect/hope of doing better/using the discovery.
The abrupt beginning of the poem, the use of conceits form everyday life and myth in the first stanza, the geographical reference of stanza two, the use of scholastic philosophy in stanza three, and ultimately the emphasis of spiritual love continue to make it one of those poems of Donne which combine intellect and emotion.
These above motioned qualities have made the poem get a certain place in honored, treasured lyrics written by John Donne.
