My listening ability developed better than my reading ability due to circumstances in life.
I spent my initial childhood (1974-1979) in Aberystwyth in Wales, UK, in a beautiful sea-side university town, where my father was studying.
At school, we all developed a habit of reading books.
I had limited exposure to television, but BBC Radio would play in the background.
The first twist came when we returned to Bangladesh in 1979.
By the time, I was prepared to read, a second twist came.
After my SSC in 1985, my parents gifted me a National Panasonic music system.
The cassette player and the radio was my portal to an imaginary world.
Just like social media is today's portal to a virtual world.
Audio attracted me much more than the world of ink and paper.
Thus began my journey with audio, through music and radio.
After studies, reading books, listening to music or following the radio was what you could do.
If devices are the portal for the night today, for me it was my music player.
I spent endless nights listening to music or the radio.
Our choices weren't much, but we were content with what we had.
The radio channel was Bangladesh Betar (then Radio Bangladesh) and its different stations.
There would be a special Yesterday Once More on Tuesdays that featured music from the 1960s and 1970s, my signature decades when it comes to music.
There was a Bangla cinema songs programme that exposed me to our master composer Alauddin Ali Shaheb and others.
BBC World Service, Voice of America, All India Radio, Radio Ceylon, Radio Luxembourg, Australian Broadcasting; the list goes on.
My love for radio resurfaced during my youth when I was studying at Cambridge.
BBC Radio 2, Radio 3, Radio 4, Radio 5, and World Service all had something for every mood and every occasion.
It was in my Cambridge days I realised how beautiful BBC Radio was.
The Guardian, UK launched the world's first podcast in 2004.
Soon, NPR (National Public Radio) of the USA started providing texts with their programmes.
Who could have dreamed this in 1985?

I've never been a TV person.
Why do I love radio so much? I can close my eyes and concentrate.
I can let my thoughts travel like they never have before.
