The Lessons of Online Learning
The Covid-19 pandemic had forced educational institutions to close down their campuses on March 17, 2020 as per government directives, and they eventually shifted to online classes.
Online classes replaced physical ones to ensure that our students do not fall behind, but the question remains as to whether this learning approach is feasible for everyone across the country, from all walks of life.
Is poor internet the real culprit?
As social distancing was enforced as a part of the safety measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, a majority of the students who stayed in Dhaka for the sole purpose of education had to return home.
Students living in remote areas have been facing a lot of trouble joining online classes, the most common of which is poor internet access and connectivity.
"Due to very poor internet connection at my village, I have to cover a distance of almost 2 kilometres to reach the bazaar in order to get the 3G signal required for sustaining the video stream," says Sharif Mahadi*, a student at the Department of Geography and Environment, University of Dhaka (DU), about the daily struggle he faces to attend online classes from Krishnapur, Brahmanbaria.
When asked about her experience, Abinta Khanam*, a fourth-year Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) student from a reputed public university in Sylhet, now living in her hometown in Noakhali had similar things to say, "Because of the trouble of getting a stable network within my house, every time I need to join a class, I grab a chair and head to an open field right outside my house gate where the network seems much better.
As a result, I miss out on the most important parts of the lecture," states Asif Hasan*, another fourth-year student at Islamic University of Technology (IUT), who attends classes from Ramkola, Nilphamari.
Has the quality of classes dropped?
Students we talked to have been quite displeased about the overall quality of classes, raising questions about the academic content being offered, the manner in which classes are being conducted, and the guidelines being conveyed from administration to students.
It doesn't sound like a bad thing until you realise that online classes have been hovering on a middle ground between a strict rote learning system and interactive critical thinking sessions.
The teachers should be more open about what they're teaching and discussing, prioritising the student's overall experience and how we can learn effectively.
"
It's rather evident that the channels of communication between students and teachers have become severely strained, with both parties failing to fully understand each other's shortcomings.
Sohana Zaman*, pursuing an undergraduate degree in Marketing at Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP), spoke about her teachers, "I don't think they're always taking our disadvantages into account.
I say so because my coursemates and I are tired of seeing the administration taking decisions just as suddenly as they're dropping them.
It seems that while most universities are making the attempt to digitise their course materials, DU's administrative body is slow to handle matters, leading the students to suffer from poor handling of online classes.
Maisha Zebin*, a second-year student of Media and Communications from Independent University Bangladesh (IUB), commented on her university's administrative body failing to provide sufficient training for some of the older members of the faculty.
Abu Bakar Siddik, a BBA student from a reputed private university in Dhaka, told us, "The quality of online classes is nowhere near that of an actual university class.
"
According to a lot of students, proper access to classes and course materials has been difficult to attain, with certain universities prohibiting any kind of recording of live classes.
Second-year CSE student from University of Asia Pacific, Showkot Iqbal* shared his thoughts, "I think they should make a reliable platform like HarvardX or MIT OpenCourseWare where they can provide pre-recorded classes, which we'd be able to access without any time-related hassles.
"
Similar measures have been put in place by Brac University (BracU) with the creation of the BuX platform where students can access all their required course materials.
Hasan Mahmud Reza, Dean of School of Health and Life Sciences at North South University (NSU) in Dhaka, for comments on dealing with the aforementioned issues.
"
Whether or not other universities will follow NSU's footsteps is dependent on the LMS' success in a Bangladeshi university, which remains to be seen.
