 But now the poet using the conjunction ‘But’ makes a contrast and say’s that all these past physical activities seem to be utterly meaningless.  It’s one of those love poems in which he praises the spiritual relationship between men and women and hails it so ardently.  They love so faithfully and ardently that their love has the force to be merged into the universal love and to move out to become “an every where”.  That the married women or men involve in extra-marital affair was a dominant theme in the Elizabethan and Jacobean literature. 

Obviously there is a shift from physical to spiritual love, sleeping to waking period, sensuous appearances to ideal reality and as if from platonic cave to the world of light in the poet and his beloved. 

In the first stanza, there is the regret for past doings, in the second stanza the pleasure of discovering something in the last stanza, the prospect/hope of doing better/using the discovery.  The closing two lines of the first stanza imply that though the poet indulged himself in ‘country pleasures’, he has never been unmindful to perfect beauty of ideal spiritual love, which he always desired and has finally ‘got’ in his present beloved.  In his metaphysics, Plato at first takes something concrete such as man, but soon he leaps into abstract namely the Form of man.  Similarly Donne also begins with physical love and soon he turns to Platonic or metaphysical love.  These above motioned qualities have made the poem get a certain place in honored, treasured lyrics written by John Donne.  The abrupt beginning of the poem, the use of conceits form everyday life and myth in the first stanza, the geographical reference of stanza two, the use of scholastic philosophy in stanza three, and ultimately the emphasis of spiritual love continue to make it one of those poems of Donne which combine intellect and emotion.  They are not afraid of separation or break up of their “relation, because” ‘what ever dyes, was not mixt equality’. 

As spiritual lovers, the poet and his beloved are indifferent to earthly pleasures and possessions – let the sea-lovers and map-lovers do what they like to do.  Surely the word ‘did’ includes the connotations of sexual doing – what did we ever do with the time?

The second stanza begins with hail and celebration.  The lovers want to be happy with their joint world though they have their individual worlds but their individual worlds are fused into a single world.  The fourth line contains a legendary conceit,a legend that tells of seven young men of Ephesus who took refuge in a cave during the persecution of Diocletian and were entombed there.  Another noticeable thing is that Donne swears his true relation – ‘I wonder by my troth’.  He compares the love experiences of himself and his beloved with `weaning’, falsely sucking country pleasures’ and `snorting.  The two lovers stand so closely that their respective faces are reflected in each others eyes.  So, fear only works in sensual lovers as motivation for watching over each other, least the other should become unfaithful to his or her mate. 