A dramatic monologue is a lyric poem in which a single imaginary speaker or a historical personage expresses his thoughts and feelings to an imaginary silent audience.
A dramatic monologue concentrates on the idiosyncrasies of the speaker.
Robert Browning is well known for his dramatic monologues.
Alfred Prufrock’ are some of the best known dramatic monologues.
Tennyson like another Victorian genius Robert Browing is good at composing dramatic monologues.
His well known poem Ulysses is an excellent example of dramatic monologue in which he adopts a classical hero Ulysses or Odysseus as the main character for his work.
Here he tries to focus on the adventurous as well as knowledge seeking spirit of Ulysses.
But the philosophy of life given through the mouth of Ulysses is actually Tennyson’s own philosophy.
In the poem Ulysses, Ulysses is supposed to be speaking and expressing his thoughts and feelings to the silent listeners.
Ulysses, the man of nimble wit, is not satisfied with his life among his subjects, who are unaware of his heroic mould.
But he refuses to take rest and is determined to take a life of adventure to the very end.
He is the man who can never take rest from the pursuit of knowledge.
Ulysses has become old but it is the knowledge and experience which he has gathered so long urges him on even in the old age to sail in quest of knowledge.
He knows that a life spent in idleness is no life at all.
He is perfectly aware that knowledge is vast and unlimited and our life on earth is too short to learn everything.
Even a number of lives taken together would be too short for gaining all knowledge.
And of this single life too a greater part has already been spent.
Hence he is determined to make the best of every moment of the remaining years of his life.
But the monologue of Ulysses reaches to the point of climax, when he inspires his sailors and makes on appeal to them to enter upon a life of exploration with great courage.
Ulysses knows that he and his sailors, being old are nearer death, but he has not given up hope and believes that old men also can earn great glory and achieve great deeds.
So, he inspires his sailors to achieve some great deeds even in their old age before thy die.
He knows that even old age cannot rob great men of their courage, bravery and other spiritual qualities.
Thus, by the monologue Tennyson portrays the character of Ulysses.
His portrayal of the character Ulysses deserves huge appreciation for there is a consonantal movement of thought, pervading the character Ulysses from beginning to the end.
Every word Uttered by Ulysses helps to constitute the idea that life is short and knowledge is unlimited, so we must not stop from pursuing knowledge.
