Is poor internet the real culprit?

As social distancing was enforced as a part of the safety measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, a majority of the students who stayed in Dhaka for the sole purpose of education had to return home. Students living in remote areas have been facing a lot of trouble joining online classes, the most common of which is poor internet access and connectivity. Covering such a distance to attend daily online classes is a major inconvenience. When asked about her experience, Abinta Khanam*, a fourth-year Computer Science and Engineering student from a reputed public university in Sylhet, now living in her hometown in Noakhali had similar things to say, «Because of the trouble of getting a stable network within my house, every time I need to join a class, I grab a chair and head to an open field right outside my house gate where the network seems much better. »

.

Has the quality of classes dropped?

Students we talked to have been quite displeased about the overall quality of classes, raising questions about the academic content being offered, the manner in which classes are being conducted, and the guidelines being conveyed from administration to students. There have been complaints about teachers progressing with online classes as though they were being conducted in-person. It doesn't sound like a bad thing until you realise that online classes have been hovering on a middle ground between a strict rote learning system and interactive critical thinking sessions. Aniqa Afroze* from DU, a student of Economics, added to Zaman's statement, discussing her university's divided stance on online learning.

It seems that while most universities are making the attempt to digitise their course materials, DU's administrative body is slow to handle matters, leading the students to suffer from poor handling of online classes. Doubts have also been raised regarding teachers' capabilities with conducting online classes. Abu Bakar Siddik, a BBA student from a reputed private university in Dhaka, told us, «The quality of online classes is nowhere near that of an actual university class. » Similar measures have been put in place by Brac University with the creation of the BuX platform where students can access all their required course materials.

In response to students expressing dissatisfaction with the online assessments, Dr. .
