CLASSES IN DHAKA

They cater to 6 to 14 year olds with seperate classes for 6 to 10 and 11 to 14 year olds respectively. They aim to teach kids 21st century skills including problem solving, critical thinking, curiosity and creativity. Aloha Bangladesh teaches mental math to kids in a way that builds their computational ability for the long run. Aloha has almost 30 branches across Dhaka city and 15 more in different districts across the country.

Their classes are split into Aloha Senior and Aloha Junior based on age range. Aloha's admission fee for their Dhaka centres ranges from BDT 4000 to BDT 5900 while their monthly fee ranges from BDT 1500 to BDT 2500. Prices vary in districts outside Dhaka. They have a «computing for kids» programme where 7 to 9-year olds are taught Scratch and 10 to 14 years olds Python.

YOUTUBE CHANNELS

While kids being on electronic devices for significant amounts of time is generally discouraged, the limited time they are allowed can be used to gear them towards science-related YouTube channels which do a great job of explaining scientific concepts in a fun, learning manner. Crash Course Kids uses animation to teach everything from space science to physical science and life science. SciShow Kids has a more practical approach and has a variety of content including fun segments such as 'Science in the Kitchen', and segments where they explain how everyday machines around us work. There are also channels that are dedicated simply to inspire and engage girls in science, such as Science With Sophie.

Similarly, CrashCourse focuses on science but for an older age range.

AT-HOME ACTIVITIES

There are plenty of fun and feasible science experiments and activities that kids can do safely at home and with available household objects . Playing around and having fun with science may create a liking for the subject once they realise how fun it can be.

GAMES AND TOYS

As a supplement to institutional science learning, board games and kits are a fun way to get kids interested in science while keeping them occupied. Onnorokom Bigganbaksho has a range of kits that cover various aspects of math and science. The boxes are sold online at Daraz and rokomari. Depending on the age range of the child, there are also toy abacuses, pattern matching card games, kid scientist kits, dominoes, Rubik's cubes and toy magnets for sale at toy shops around the city.

These games help kids develop counting skills, spatial skills and pattern identifying ability or helps them learn about structures, gravity and forces.

NETFLIX

The best titles on Netflix that'll inspire and educate kids are Emily's Wonder Lab, Sid the Science Kid, 72 Cutest Animals, The Magic School Bus Rides Again, Growing Up Wild, If I Were An Animal and Brainchild. A Plastic Ocean , The Bleeding Edge , 14 Minutes from Earth , Jane , Chasing Ice , Mission Blue and The Ivory Game are a few starters available on Netflix.
