Such a structure developed in the Western world in the period of time following the Industrial Revolution, and replaced the agrarian societies of the pre-modern, pre-industrial age. Industrial societies are generally mass societies, and may be succeeded by an information society. They are often contrasted with traditional societies. Industrial societies use external energy sources, such as fossil fuels, to increase the rate and scale of production.

The production of food is shifted to large commercial farms where the products of industry, such as combine harvesters and fossil fuel-based fertilizers, are used to decrease required human labor while increasing production. No longer needed for the production of food, excess labor is moved into these factories where mechanization is utilized to further increase efficiency. As populations grow, and mechanization is further refined, often to the level of automation, many workers shift to expanding service industries. Industrial society makes urbanization desirable, in part so that workers can be closer to centers of production, and the service industry can provide labor to workers and those that benefit financially from them, in exchange for a piece of production profits with which they can buy goods.

This leads to the rise of very large cities and surrounding suburb areas with a high rate of economic activity. This makes the reliable availability of the needed energy resources high priority in industrial government policies. In the eighteenth century, Europe experienced a dramatic rise in technological invention, ushering in an era known as the Industrial Revolution. Gas lights allowed increased visibility in the dark, and towns and cities developed a nightlife.

One of the results of increased productivity and technology was the rise of urban centers. Workers flocked to factories for jobs, and the populations of cities became increasingly diverse. The new generation became less preoccupied with maintaining family land and traditions and more focused on acquiring wealth and achieving upward mobility for themselves and their families. People wanted their children and their children’s children to continue to rise to the top, and as capitalism increased, so did social mobility.

It was during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries of the Industrial Revolution that sociology was born. Life was changing quickly and the long-established traditions of the agricultural eras did not apply to life in the larger cities. Eventually, concerns over the exploitation of workers led to the formation of labor unions and laws that set mandatory conditions for employees. In the simplest sense, an industrial society is a social system whose mode of production focuses primarily on finished good manufactured with the aid of machinery.

In industrial society the largest portion of the labour force is involved in mechanized production of goods and services. Industrial society refers to that form of society, or any particular society in which industrialization and modernization have occurred.

Characteristics of industrial society

What is called the first Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-18th century to about 1830 and was mostly confined to Britain. The second Industrial Revolution lasted from the mid-19th century until the early 20th century and took place in Britain, continental Europe, North America, and Japan. Later in the 20th century, the second Industrial Revolution spread to other parts of the world. The Industrial Revolution transformed economies that had been based on agriculture and handicrafts into economies based on large-scale industry, mechanized manufacturing, and the factory system.

It should be noted that, although industrialization is generally thought of as something affecting the manufacturing of goods, it is reasonable and indeed necessary to apply the term industrial to modern methods of raising productivity in agriculture and other industrial sectors, and in administrative contexts.



Some would say that improving technology has made our lives easier. In this period of globalization, change is driven by technology, particularly the Internet . But also consider that technology can create change in the other three forces social scientists link to social change. Advances in medical technology allow otherwise infertile women to bear children, which indirectly leads to an increase in population.

Advances in agricultural technology have allowed us to genetically alter and patent food products, which changes our environment in innumerable ways. From the way we educate children in the classroom to the way we grow the food we eat, technology has impacted all aspects of modern life. Think about the technology that goes into keeping nuclear power plants running safely and securely. What happens if an earthquake or other disaster, like in the case of Japan’s Fukushima plant, causes the technology to malfunction, not to mention the possibility of a systematic attack to our nation’s relatively vulnerable technological infrastructure?.



We recently hit a population milestone of 7 billion humans on Earth’s surface. To explore these questions, we turn to demography, or the study of populations. Three of the most important components affecting the issues above are fertility, mortality, and migration. The fertility rate of a society is a measure noting the number of children born.

The fertility number is generally lower than the fecundity number, which measures the potential number of children that could be born to women of childbearing age. When analyzed together, fertility and mortality rates help researchers understand the overall growth occurring in a population. Another key element in studying populations is the movement of people into and out of an area. The growth rate of a population, or how much the population of defined area grows or shrinks in a specific time period, is therefore a function of the number of births and deaths as well as the number of people migrating to and from a country.

It is calculated as the current population minus the initial population divided by the initial population .



Finding out why involves unpicking a complex knot of cognitive and social factors – an imposing task. The arrow of time points in one direction, so economic performance cannot be expected to influence people’s opinions in the past. Global Gallup surveys give us a clear view of the relationship between secularisation and economic development – that the world’s poorest countries are also its most religious. The early 20th century French sociologist Emile Durkheim believed that economic development came first.

He saw religion as meeting society’s practical functions, such as education and welfare. But when prosperous societies started to meet these functions all by themselves, religion was pushed to the margins. He wrote that the Protestant Reformation unleashed a stampede of productivity and economic improvement because of the «Protestant work ethic». Increasingly the state took over many of the roles of the family listed by Murdock, leaving the family with the two irreducible functions previously referred to.

According to Parsons, this social change precipitated a clear change in the family from extended families with many functions, in the pre-industrials society, to privatised nuclear families with fewer functions in industrial society.

When humans weren't spending all of their time acquiring the food they were allowed to specialize and perform other tasks. During the Industrial Revolution, labor that was once specialized was broken down for the assembly line. However, the assembly line itself can also be seen as a division of labor.

Receiving a good education helps empower you, thus making you strong enough to look after yourself in any given situation. It keeps you aware of your given surrounding as well as the rules and regulations of the society you're living in.

State which assumes the central power in the industrial society is more known for its welfare activities than for the regulative functions. Warfare can be ruinous for an advanced industrial society for it involves deadly war weapons and economic dislocations.



Despite progress in many areas such as fighting hunger and poverty, social inequality keeps growing. It undermines social cohesion and trust in democracy, hampering economic growth and preventing social advancement. The whole of society is affected. Economic inequality affects many areas of life, including life expectancy, education opportunities and health.



Heterogeneity makes a difference because one of the central goals of positivist science is to discover strong regularities among classes of phenomena, and regularities appear to presuppose homogeneity of the things over which the regularities are thought to obtain. So to observe that social phenomena are deeply heterogeneous at many levels of scale, is to cast fundamental doubt on the goal of discovering strong social regularities. Let's consider some of the forms of heterogeneity that the social world illustrates. First is the heterogeneity of social causes and influences.

Social events are commonly the result of a variety of different kinds of causes that come together in highly contingent conjunctions. A revolution may be caused by a protracted drought, a harsh system of land tenure, a new ideology of peasant solidarity, a communications system that conveys messages to the rural poor, and an unexpected spar within the rulers -- all coming together at a moment in time. Second is the heterogeneity that can be discovered within social categories of things -- cities, religions, electoral democracies, social movements. Third is the heterogeneity that can be discovered across and within social groups.

There are always interesting gradients within any social group. So there is heterogeneity of motives and agency within the agent. Social outcomes emerge from this heterogeneous and dynamic mixture, and the quest for general laws is deeply quixotic.
