England: Birthplace of the Industrial Revolution

Thanks in part to its damp climate, ideal for raising sheep, Britain had a long history of producing textiles like wool, linen and cotton. But prior to the Industrial Revolution, the British textile business was a true «cottage industry,» with the work performed in small workshops or even homes by individual spinners, weavers and dyers. This method was both cheaper and produced higher-quality material, enabling Britain’s iron and steel production to expand in response to demand created by the Napoleonic Wars and the later growth of the railroad industry.

CAUSES OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

The Industrial Revolution first began in Britain in the 18th century but soon spread throughout Europe and North America. Capitalism was a central component necessary for the rise of industrialization. Historians refer to the form of capitalism common during the Industrial Revolution as laissez-faire capitalism. Capitalism caused the Industrial Revolution because industrialization required significant work and investment from individuals and not necessarily the government.

The next major factor that helped the development of the Industrial Revolution was the impact of European Imperialism. While not directly a cause of the start of the Industrial Revolution, imperialism as a concept was linked with the growth of industrialization. In general, the Age of Imperialism occurred prior to and during the rise of industrialization. The next main reason for the start of the Industrial Revolution was the mining of resources such as coal, which were vital to the processes of industrialization.

For instance, Britain was the first to industrialize and had large supplies of coal present in the country. Coal was a necessary ingredient in the industrial process as it fueled the steam engines that were used in trains, ships and all other sorts of machinery. Finally, the last cause of the Industrial Revolution was the effects of the Agricultural Revolution. The revolution led to an increase in food production and helped increase the population on European societies.

Transportation During the Industrial Revolution

In the early 1800s, Richard Trevithick debuted a steam-powered locomotive, and in 1830 similar locomotives started transporting freight between the industrial hubs of Manchester and Liverpool.

Communication and Banking in the Industrial Revolution

The latter part of the Industrial Revolution also saw key advances in communication methods, as people increasingly saw the need to communicate efficiently over long distances. In it, Smith promoted an economic system based on free enterprise, the private ownership of means of production, and lack of government interference.

The Industrial Revolution in the United States

He later built several other cotton mills in New England, and became known as the «Father of the American Industrial Revolution». The United States followed its own path to industrialization, spurred by innovations «borrowed» from Britain as well as by homegrown inventors like Eli Whitney. Whitney’s 1793 invention of the cotton gin revolutionized the nation’s cotton industry . By the end of the 19th century, with the so-called Second Industrial Revolution underway, the United States would also transition from a largely agrarian society to an increasingly urbanized one, with all the attendant problems.

By the mid-19th century, industrialization was well-established throughout the western part of Europe and America’s northeastern region. By the early 20th century, the U. On the other, the move to cities and inventions that made clothing, communication and transportation more affordable and accessible to the masses changed the course of world history. Regardless of these questions, the Industrial Revolution had a transformative economic, social and cultural impact, and played an integral role in laying the foundations for modern society.
