Battling pandemic fatigue: Some feel burned out as the Covid-19 outbreak drags on with no end in sight

His 55-year-old mother was retrenched from a part-time job as a food promoter in February and his father, a 59-year-old taxi driver, has seen earnings fall since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Because of this, his mood and energy has been low and he no longer enjoys the walks he used to take in the neighbourhood. Dr Annabelle Chow, principal clinical psychologist at Annabelle Psychology, said the burnout a person experiences due to effects brought about by Covid-19 is a sign of pandemic fatigue. «Pandemic fatigue describes a mental state where a prolonged, heightened state of fear and caution leads to a form of burnout.

Although it is not classified as a mental disorder, the effects of pandemic fatigue are nevertheless real and have an impact on those experiencing it,» she said. The restrictions were a «drastic change» to people's daily routine and way of life. «Everyone was required to adapt in a short amount of time and many people were accepting of these restrictions as they thought it was a short-term measure to deal with the virus,» said Chen, who is head of psychology at NUH. «But when the circuit breaker was extended and subsequent announcements about phase one and phase two were made, it was hard for people to keep up, and even more so with no clear end in sight».

Dr Chow said seniors, children, caregivers, front-line workers, those who are living alone or socially isolated, and those who already struggle with depression and anxiety have an increased risk of getting pandemic fatigue. Working adults have also been hit hard. Dr Geraldine Tan, director and principal psychologist at The Therapy Room, started noticing signs of pandemic fatigue in her clients last month. « The breaks they used to take overseas are now non-existent and the work they do has taken a radical shift for some, especially if they are working from home,» she said.

« I've put on 5kg since the circuit breaker and I don't want people to see me looking like a mess at home. » NUH's Chen said a lot of energy is required to pay attention to non-verbal communication, which is harder to pick up over video conferencing. «The multi-person screens tax the brain further from the need to process and decode all the information at once. » It showed that 44 per cent of people are tired of following the necessary health measures.

Dr Chow said the constant barrage of Covid-19 news and advisories could actually be desensitising and complacency may set in. «Repeated exposure to pandemic-related news will eventually diminish the initial feelings of anxiety and caution. Consequently, we may begin to engage in behaviours that were initially inhibited by the anxiety responses, such as not adhering to safe distancing rules or washing our hands as regularly as we did before,» she said. Habituation - the progressive decrease in response, such as feelings of anxiety, after repeated exposure to a stimulus - has caused people to become less careful or conscious about the precautions they need to take than they were at the start of the pandemic, said Chen.

«This means that over time - especially if we or anyone we knew did not get Covid-19 - we are likely to be less careful or conscious about the precautions as it would appear that there is less of a need to maintain such levels of vigilance,» she said. While it is normal to drop our guard when we see no end in sight, a reminder of the benefits of maintaining precautions and the consequences of not doing so would help people stay vigilant to fight Covid-19, Chen added. Dr Chow cautioned that social avoidance and distancing can make people feel isolated and lonely, and may increase stress and anxiety. Chen advised people to seek help from a psychologist if they experience persistent anxiety, hopelessness or sadness for more than two weeks, which in turn affects their performance and relationships.

While it is normal to feel weary in response to the pandemic, it is important to remember that «we are not alone in our struggles», she said. «This is a marathon and not a short sprint, so people need to manage their expectations and pace themselves so that they are able to go the distance,» she added.

HOW TO COPE WITH PANDEMIC FATIGUE

Terri Chen, head of psychology and senior clinical psychologist at the National University Hospital's department of psychological medicine, gives some tips. Practise awareness to take care of your mental health. Take some time to check in with yourself daily. This can be as short as one minute a day to observe and describe to yourself what you are thinking and feeling within.

This can lead to criticisms being directed towards ourselves or others, which may worsen our mood. Research has shown that this can help us feel happier and it also boosts our immune system and energy levels.